Welcome back.
It's time to walk through our own implementation of hash table.
Now before we get started I do want to mention something that you may be wondering about that is this
underscore over here.
What does that mean.
In most other languages like Java when you create a class you can have private properties.
That is properties that I can't access outside of this class.
So I wouldn't be able to do my hash table underscore Pash and access this property or method now with
JavaScript iOS 6.
That's not really possible.
And there is a common standard which is to put underscore here in the javascript world which says this
is a private property.
Now this is just meaningless really.
I can still access the hash method but it is a developer standard in the javascript community to let
other developers know that hey you shouldn't be accessing this even though you technically can't and
there are ways to make it work and half private properties.
But it requires things like closure symbols or weak maps which again is beyond the scope of this course.
And we don't need to worry about.
So that's where the underscore is coming from.
We're not usually going to access hash function like this right now that we got that out of the way.
Let's talk a little bit about what this does.
If I enter in here grapes we first create a new variable that is hash that is equal to zero and then
this key we're going to grab the length of grapes.
So that is one two three four five six and we're going to add zero which comes from the hash plus key
character code at and character code at.
In Javascript simply gives us an integer between 0 and his number representing the UTF 16 code.
So that's just an encoding.
So pretty much saying give me a character code because remember in memory a string or a letter is represented
as a number.
So this method allows us to say at index whatever we put in the parameter so let's say we're looking
at index of I.
The very first song will be g we're going to get the character code for G that is a number we multiply
that by the index again just to make sure this makes it unique.
And then we use what's called the modulo operator to make sure that this stays within the length of
50 the size of our data.
And then we return the hash.
An easy way to see what's happening here is to simply console dialogue hash if I run this.
We see that it's going to loop through our grapes character by character.
It's going to generate some sort of a hash and because this hash gets constantly looped over we include
whatever the generated let's see the first one is zero.
It's going to say zero plus whatever this is.
Then the next iteration hash is going to equal 14 and generates something else which is eight and keeps
going keeps going keeps going until we get twenty three you can take your time and go through this code
if you really want to.
Again this is not the focus of this video so let's move on using our hash function.
Let's do our very first method let's create the set method.
This set method is going to receive a key and a value and just so we can see this and what's going to
happen we'll run this method here saying we want grapes to equal ten thousand lots of grapes because
they are delicious.
If I run this I get undefined because while this isn't really doing anything the first thing we want
to do is to create a variable called let address which will represent where we want to store this information
and we'll say this dot
so all we're saying is store this data that we're going to insert the key and value in this address
space that is created by our hash function.
And we give it the key of grapes.
Remember our little animation.
We're sending the grapes to into that magic little box that is the hash function from there.
We simply say if this dot data
address if it doesn't exist and there's nothing there.
Because remember in a hash table we can have collisions and because we only have 50 spaces 50 shelves
here we might have these collisions with enough data.
So we're going to check if there is nothing there.
In that case I'll just simply add that data.
We're going to say this data
address is going to be an array and in this new space new address space we're simply going to had
by doing push key value so let's run this and see what happens.
And I have a misspelt address here.
Let's run that again.
I get undefined but let's see what happens if I just console dot blog this dot data here.
Well we check that at we have twenty three empty items on the twenty fourth item.
We have grapes 10000 an array here and then twenty six empty items after that.
Remember we have 50 shells in our memory and we have 23 24 plus 26.
That's 50 except our grapes was inserted somewhere and 50.
It looks like twenty four spot very cool but what happens if this already exists if I change the hash
table to just have let's say two memory spaces and I click Run here I get one empty and grapes and if
I change this around oh do you see that if I click again and let's say go back to just grapes check
out what happens to my hash table I click Run and it just deleted my previous entry we have a collision
but we're not doing anything about it and we've just deleted our data that could have been really important
user data we definitely don't want that.
So in order to solve that we simply say if because we're checking here if there is nothing in that address
space do this.
Otherwise
simply add on to that array.
So we can actually just
run the same command here a nicer and cleaner way of doing this is to actually just take out the else
because regardless we're always going to be pushing key and value we're always going to be adding the
key and value that we set.
We add to the data so all we do is just remove this so that when I run this and just so we know what's
happening let's return this dot data here.
I'm going to hit run and if we add here let's say another item this time we'll say apples and just 50
for apples.
If I run this do you see what happened here.
If you look closely we have one empty item and then an array that contains inside of it the first index
that is an array and a second index.
That is another array because we've just pushed on to our existing array because our memory space is
only two very cool.
That wasn't too bad.
Let's keep going.
The next one is well I want to grab be able to grab grapes and apples.
We can use the get method here which will receive a key and this method is going to work
very nicely by just saying get and then while we want to grab which will be grapes we're going to do
the exact same thing in that we run it through that black box where we're going to create or we're going
to use the hash function to get the address of where we want to go and now we have the address to where
we want to grab our information from however remember that we store this information in a bucket.
So we have grapes and 10000.
How do we grab that.
We know where to get it from now.
We have the address but we now need to loop over and grab grapes and then 10000 or apples and then 50
for it.
Let me show you what I mean.
We'll first create a variable says saying current bucket that will just be this dot data dot or address
just so we don't repeat ourself and we have a reference to this address or to the address and the data
value.
So this means if we console dialogue current bucket and I run this you see that I have the current bucket
even though this has two items remember that it is technically just within its own bucket within one
array.
If we increase this memory space to let's say 50 we see that this bucket contains grapes.
So we're grabbing this information but all we want to do is have 10000 being returned.
That's our hash tables work or the get in the hash function works well.
All we need to do is to say if current bucket and we'll say dot length.
That is if this current bucket has something in it.
In that case we are going to do something otherwise we're going to just return undefined because there's
nothing in the bucket.
We're checking if this actually exists so if there's nothing in the array if the length is zero and
the array is empty well then we're not interested in it as a matter of fact we actually don't even need
the length here because remember initially it's just going to be an empty array with undefined and we
add an array to each slot whenever we set something.
And it's an empty address so we can just leave it like that because if it's undefined it'll skip over
and return undefined now in here.
We will do a for loop because remember we might have multiple items in this bucket like we saw when
we had to memory spaces in which case let me actually demonstrate that so we can see it.
It's a run and current bucket against Paul helps run that again.
All right if we console dialogue the current bucket and run this we see that we have two items in that
bucket so we will need to loop over using our favorite for loop which we've done a ton by now we're
going to say as long as I is less than the cream bucket.
Let just increment hi and within here this is a little bit tricky so hopefully you follow.
I'm going to say if current bucket by which is the index so remember is going to say zero which is going
to grab this then one which is going to grab this if current bucket the grapes.
So if I do zero here that means grab the first in our case the eye so it's going to be zero.
First grab this first array then grab the zero index within this array which will be grapes and then
once it loops the next time around an eye is 1.
It's going to be apples.
Check that against the key.
Remember the key that we receive here that we are looking for.
So if grapes which is the key matches with this item in that case just return the current bucket.
The high and 1 because we want to return 10000 hopefully you fall here because if I run this I get 10000
the get grapes is 10000.
If I do apples here it is 50 for how cool is that.
And looking at this I hope you understand on a deeper level the time complexity implications of hash
tables even though we're doing a loop here within the hash function remember that hash functions are
really really fast we're just looping over the key so we don't consider this to be a 0 event.
This is very very fast.
It's 0 of 1 when we set something.
There's no loops here.
We're just adding it to our data.
We're just pushing it.
So that is over 1 and if we go to get most of the time if there's no collisions it's going to be 0 of
1 and in real life most of the time you can consider that it is 0 of 1.
But in our really bad example with just two memory spaces and not a very good hash function well this
can become 0 that but for now because we're good programmers that won't happen right.
Everything will be good.
We have 0 0 of 1 get we have the for loop here that might create that list we saw in our example see
this list that we have here.
This is what we created and it would be all then if this list just kept going and kept growing and kept
growing but there is one other method that I want us to build and to showcase to you.
One other downside of hash tables.
What if we wanted to go through all the keys of the hash table.
How would we do that.
We're going to try and implement that in the next video.